documentation/displays/wiring-guide-generic-2.4-spi.md, before:

# Wiring Guides for Moddable supported SPI displays

Copyright 2018 Moddable Tech, Inc.  
Revised: January 2, 2018


## Generic 2.4" & 2.8" displays (with resistive touch)
**Size:** 2.4" & 2.8", 320 x 240

**Type:** TFT LCD

**Interface:** SPI

**Drivers:** video [ILI9341](../../documentation/drivers/ili9341/ili9341.md), touch XPT2046

**Availability:** [Generic SPI Displays on eBay] (https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_odkw=spi+display+2.4&_osacat=0&_from=R40&_trksid=p2045573.m570.l1313.TR0.TRC0.H0.Xspi+display+2.4+touch.TRS0&_nkw=spi+display+2.4+touch&_sacat=0)

**Description:** These inexpensive displays are available on eBay and other resources. Note: They are available in touch and non-touch versions which appear very similar.

![Generic SPI Display](images/spi-touch-display.jpg)

**Moddable Sample code:** The Piu example [Drag](../../examples/piu/drag/) is good for testing this display. The build command below includes the -d, debug flag.

```
cd $MODDABLE/examples/piu/drag
mcconfig -d -m -r 0 -f rgb565le -p esp screen=ili9341 touch=xpt2046  
```
At this time Moddable sample code does not include display SD card support.

**ESP8266 Pinout:**

| ILI9341 Display | ESP8266 | ESP8266 Devboard label
| --- | --- | --- |
| SDO / MISO | GPIO 12 | (D6) 
| LED | 3.3V | 
| SCK | GPIO 14 | (D5) 
| SDI / MOSI | GPIO 13 | (D7) 
| CS | GPIO 15 | (D8)
| DC | GPIO 2 | (D4) 
| RESET | 3.3V | 
| GND | GND | 
| VCC | 3.3V | 
| T_DO | GPIO 12 | (D6) 
| T_DIn | GPIO 13 | (D7) 
| T_CLK | GPIO 14 | (D5) 
| T_IRQ | GPIO 16 | (D0)
| T_CS | GPIO 0 | (D3) 

![Generic 2.4"-2.8" wiring illustration](images/esp-generic-2.4-display.png)

Commit message:

ESP8266 subplatforms, wiring guide updates, etc.

documentation/displays/wiring-guide-generic-2.4-spi.md, after:

# Generic 2.4" & 2.8" Displays (Resistive Touch) Wiring Guide - ESP8266

Copyright 2018 Moddable Tech, Inc.  
Revised: October 23, 2018

<img src="images/spi-touch-display.jpg" height=250>

## Specs

| | |
| :---: | :--- |
| **Size** | 2.4" & 2.8", 320 x 240
| **Type** | TFT LCD
| **Interface** | SPI
| **Drivers** | video [ILI9341](../../documentation/drivers/ili9341/ili9341.md), touch XPT2046
| **Availability** | [Generic SPI Displays on eBay](https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_odkw=spi+display+2.4&_osacat=0&_from=R40&_trksid=p2045573.m570.l1313.TR0.TRC0.H0.Xspi+display+2.4+touch.TRS0&_nkw=spi+display+2.4+touch&_sacat=0)
| **Description** | These inexpensive displays are available on eBay and other resources. <BR><BR>Note: They are available in touch and non-touch versions which appear very similar.

> At this time Moddable sample code does not include display SD card support.

## Moddable example code

The [drag](../../examples/piu/drag/) example is good for testing this display.  To run a debug build, use the following build command:

```
cd $MODDABLE/examples/piu/drag
mcconfig -d -m -p esp/moddable_zero
```

## ESP8266 Pinout

| ILI9341 Display | ESP8266 | ESP8266 Devboard label
| --- | --- | --- |
| SDO / MISO | GPIO 12 | (D6) 
| LED | 3.3V | 
| SCK | GPIO 14 | (D5) 
| SDI / MOSI | GPIO 13 | (D7) 
| CS | GPIO 15 | (D8)
| DC | GPIO 2 | (D4) 
| RESET | 3.3V | 
| GND | GND | 
| VCC | 3.3V | 
| T_DO | GPIO 12 | (D6) 
| T_DIn | GPIO 13 | (D7) 
| T_CLK | GPIO 14 | (D5) 
| T_IRQ | GPIO 16 | (D0)
| T_CS | GPIO 0 | (D3) 

![Generic 2.4"-2.8" wiring illustration](images/esp-generic-2.4-display.png)
